The Role of Geopolitics in International Trade
BIS Working Paper No. 1249 — March 2025

INTRODUCTION

Following a relatively benign period of increasing trade integration, concerns about “deglobalisation” have grown along with geopolitical tensions recently. The US administration from 2017 to 2021 saw increasing restrictions, often concentrated on trade with China (Brown, 2021). The Russian Invasion of Ukraine (in February 2022) saw further trade restrictions (Borin et al, 2023). Against this backdrop, world exports as a share of GDP peaked around the time of the GFC and has been trending down since then (Graph 1). World trade export value1 As a percentage of world GDP Graph 1 a Russian invasion of Ukraine (24 February 2022). Calculated as global exports divided by global GDP at current prices. Source: Macrobond. While the decline in world trade in recent years coincides with heightened geopolitical risks, a correlation alone is far from conclusive evidence of a link between them. For one, geopolitics may alter the configuration of trade without affecting its overall value, for example if countries move to favour trading with geopolitically aligned trading partners over others more strongly. In addition, many other factors also influence global trade, including the strength of supply in exporting countries and demand in importing countries. Thus, if some major importers grow more slowly, this is likely to translate into reduced global trade flows that has nothing to do with geopolitics. In this paper, we investigate the relationship between geopolitics and trade. Building on Amiti et al (2024a,b), we use granular bilateral trade data, across around 5,000 finely disaggregated sectors. This allows us to focus on not just trade values, as is standard in much of the extant literature, but also on the underlying quantities and the prices at which trade takes place. As explained later, this empirical approach uses source economy fixed effects to attribute any empirical effect in a given sector that is common across exports from one source economy to all destination economies as due to supply factors in the source economy. Conversely, destination economy fixed effects attribute any empirical effect that is common between exports from all source economies to one destination economy to demand factors in the destination economy. The role of geopolitics in international trade To these elements, we add the geopolitical distance between each pair of economies, as in Qiu et al (2024). This is specified as a continuous variable, and the estimated coefficients on this at each point in time are our primary focus. We expect these to vary with geopolitical tensions if countries impose different trade policies (such as tariffs, restrictions or licensing requirements) towards geopolitical allies than adversaries. For example, less geopolitically aligned economies may be more likely to put in place trade barriers or make existing trade barriers higher when tensions are higher. Using our model, and granular bilateral trade data across finely disaggregated sectors, we are able to corroborate a key finding from the existing literature on the effects of geopolitics on trade, and go further. Previous work has mostly found that geopolitics plays an important role in reducing the value of trade between geopolitically distant countries relative to that between geopolitically close ones. Our estimates indicate that the value of trade between geopolitical adversaries grew around 12 percentage points more slowly over 2017-2023 than between geopolitical allies, and this effect strengthened in the aftermath of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Going further than most previous work, we show that the effect is primarily real: quantities grew around 12 percentage points slower between geopolitical adversaries compared to allies, whereas the equivalent difference in free on board (FOB) prices was close to zero. 2 Our approach differs from that used elsewhere in terms of methodology, data granularity and/or scope. Most existing work on the effects of geopolitics on trade builds on the “gravity model” of bilateral trade flows between countries. This modelling approach has a long history, going back to Isard (1954). It seeks to explain the aggregate level of trade between pairs
