Regional Economic Outlook — Executive Summary
IMF Middle East and Central Asia — October 2024

Eighty years after the landmark Bretton Woods conference catalyzed multilateral cooperation, the global
economic landscape faces growing challenges, including related to the rise of geoeconomic fragmentation. In
the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and Caucasus and Central Asia (CCA) regions, changes to regional
landscapes have prompted new trade patterns. At the same time, economies are navigating frequent shocks.
Conflicts, including in Gaza, Lebanon, and Sudan, cause immense human suffering, economic damage, and
heightened uncertainty. Climate-related disasters add to the challenges. For many MENA and CCA economies,
near-term growth is projected to remain subdued, and the medium-term growth forecast has deteriorated
during the past two decades (Chapter 2), partly reflecting still limited access to credit for the private sector,
which is essential to boost investment (Chapter 3).
In MENA economies, growth is expected to remain sluggish in 2024 at 2.1 percent amid global geoeconomic
fragmentation, conflicts, climate-related shocks, and country-specific factors. This is a downward revision of 0.6
percentage point since the April 2024 Regional Economic Outlook in light of prolonged voluntary oil production
cuts and continued conflicts. A rebound is expected in 2025, with growth projected at 4 percent, conditional
on the expiration of oil production cuts and headwinds subsiding, including from conflicts. MENA oil exporters
have navigated the global landscape well, but the twin surpluses that helped cushion recent shocks have
started to narrow amid ambitious investment strategies and falling oil revenues. MENA oil importers continue to
grapple with vulnerabilities related to conflicts and high gross financing needs. Even as these issues gradually
abate, uncertainty remains high and structural gaps will likely hold back productivity growth in many economies
over the forecast horizon.
In CCA economies, growth is projected to remain robust and broad-based at 4.3 percent in 2024 and
4.5 percent in 2025. Notwithstanding the positive outlook, growth remains subject to high uncertainty, mainly
because of the region’s exposure to broader geoeconomic developments. Notably, there are tentative signs
of a potential slowdown in some economies, as trade and other inflows—particularly remittances—related to
Russia’s war in Ukraine have started to moderate. Over the medium term, growth prospects for oil exporters in
the CCA are weighed down by subdued oil production, whereas growth projections in oil importers are reliant
on effective reform implementation.
Risks to the outlook for the MENA and CCA regions remain tilted to the downside. Adverse shocks could originate
from within or close to the MENA and CCA regions. Notably, the continuation or further escalation of conflicts
would result in even larger human tolls and further weigh on growth, as conflicts tend to have long-lasting adverse
economic impacts. Other risks include insufficient reform implementation hindering growth and financial instability caused by an abrupt reversal of trade and financial flows associated with Russia’s war in Ukraine.
In this context, adopting policies to bolster future growth prospects will be crucial. Lifting medium-term growth
will require the acceleration of structural reforms, particularly in governance. Given labor market challenges,
which are expected to intensify because of shifting demographics in the years ahead, decisive action is needed
to enhance participation and job creation, including encouraging more female and youth employment, particularly in several economies in the MENA region (Chapter 2). At the same time, implementing reforms to promote
private sector investment and deepening financial development would help boost relatively low levels of capital
per worker across the MENA and CCA regions (Chapter 2). In this respect, financial sector policies that foster
competition, reduce the dominance of state-owned banks, and encourage the broadening of the investor base
can advance financial development and facilitate higher growth and inclusion (Chapter 3). Moreover, countries
should maintain a strong focus on ensuring fiscal sustainability and rebuilding fiscal buffers. Policies that put
debt on a durable decline are essential for highly indebted economies. Despite a decline in inflation and expectations for continued moderation, policymakers also must remain vigilant and maintain their focus on achieving
inflation targets in accordance with their frameworks.

ix
