Regional Developments and Economic Outlook
IMF Middle East and Central Asia — October 2024 (Chapter 1 excerpt)

1. Regional Developments and Economic Outlook: Navigating the Evolving Geoeconomic Landscape

1. Regional Developments and Economic Outlook:
Navigating the Evolving Geoeconomic Landscape1
Eight decades after the landmark Bretton Woods conference catalyzed multilateral cooperation, the geoeconomic landscape is increasingly rocky. Global linkages are shifting amid a mix of economic interests and
national security considerations. At the same time, many economies in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
and Caucasus and Central Asia (CCA) regions are navigating frequent shocks, including from conflicts and
climate-related disasters. Medium-term growth prospects also remain relatively weak. Coupled with risks that
remain on the downside, policymakers will need to focus on bolstering growth and resilience while ensuring
fiscal sustainability and maintaining low inflation. Beyond carefully calibrated monetary and fiscal policies,
decisive reform efforts, particularly in governance and job creation, are essential to lift medium-term growth.

1.1. Global Backdrop: Uncertainty Seeping in as Policies Shift
Global growth is projected to continue at a similar pace in 2024 and 2025 (3.2 percent) and remain relatively flat
through 2029 (3.1 percent), largely unchanged from the April 2024 World Economic Outlook.2 Economic activity in the
United States is revised upward to 2.8 percent in 2024, reflecting stronger outturns in consumption and residential
investment. Meanwhile, China’s growth slowdown is expected to be more gradual, with the economy now expected to
grow at 4.8 percent this year (0.2 percentage point higher than the April forecast), because of renewed fiscal support
and a rebound in exports. At the same time, the world is witnessing an escalation in geoeconomic fragmentation, with an
increase in cross-border trade restrictions. In turn, although global trade to GDP is projected to remain broadly stable,
trade is increasingly occurring within geopolitical blocs, rather than between them. Specifically, when comparing the
period-average for 2017–22 to the first quarter of 2024, goods trade declined by approximately 2.5 percentage points
more between geopolitically distant blocs than within blocks (see Chapter 1 of the October 2024 World Economic
Outlook; Gopinath 2024).
Global inflation continues to gradually decline toward targets, with global headline inflation projected to
moderate to 5.8 percent in 2024 and 4.3 percent in 2025 (from 6.7 percent in 2023). However, disinflation is
expected to be faster in advanced economies and to stall in emerging markets and developing economies.
Nonetheless, with inflation in many major economies approaching central bank targets and governments striving
to manage debt dynamics, the policy mix is expected to shift from monetary to fiscal tightening. Notably, the
US Federal Funds rate is projected to reach its long-term equilibrium of 2.9 percent in the second quarter of
2026, almost a year before what was expected in April. Alongside, and in part as OPEC+, voluntary produc­tion
cuts have been extended, average petroleum price assumptions have been revised since April and are now
projected to gradually moderate from $81.3 on average in 2024 (above the 2023 average price) to $67 in 2029.
Meanwhile, food commodity prices have eased somewhat faster than previously projected, and the continued
moderation should help alleviate pressures on consumer food prices worldwide.
