Commodity Markets Outlook — Executive Summary
World Bank Group — October 2024

THE STATE OF COMMODITY MARKETS

The early 2020s were characterized by large global shocks—the COVID-19 pandemic recession and subsequent rebound, a sharp runup in inflation, and Russia's invasion of Ukraine—accompanied by highly correlated swings in commodity prices. Over the last year, the economic effects of those outsized shocks have substantially abated, with global economic growth steadying and inflation moving toward targets. Correspondingly, commodity markets appear to be departing from a period of tight synchronization. Over the last year, commodity prices have been buffeted by a wide range of developments, including shifting expectations about supply management, surges in conflict-related risk, trade restrictions, and weather-related supply shocks.

ENERGY AND GEOPOLITICAL RISK

In energy markets, geopolitical tensions have remained a critical driver of short-term price movements. Oil markets have responded to geopolitical flare-ups, with prices surpassing $90/bbl in October 2023 and April 2024. Anticipated oil price volatility approached its highest levels since Russia's invasion of Ukraine in early October 2024, as oil prices surged by 10 percent in just three days. Prices have tended to subsequently fall back, however, reflecting ample potential oil supply.

Commodity prices are expected to decrease by 5 percent in 2025 and 2 percent in 2026, after softening 3 percent this year. The Brent crude oil price is projected to average $80/bbl in 2024, before slipping to $73/bbl in 2025 and $72/bbl in 2026. Thus, from their 2022 high, annual average oil prices are expected to decline for four consecutive years through to 2026. The possibility of escalating conflict in the Middle East represents a substantial near-term upside risk to energy prices, with potential knock-on consequences for other commodities.

Three underlying longer-term factors shape the outlook. First, global oil consumption is decelerating, continuing the secular decline in the oil intensity of global GDP. Second, global oil supply continues to diversify, with the market share of non-OPEC+ producers gradually increasing. Third, following successive rounds of output cuts, OPEC+ holds spare oil capacity equivalent to slightly more than 7 percent of current global production—about double the average spare capacity in 2017-19, when the Brent oil price averaged $63/bbl.

RISK SCENARIOS

In the near term, the possibility of escalating conflict in the Middle East poses substantial upside risks to energy prices. A conflict-related reduction in the region's energy exports could drive oil and gas prices higher, with knock-on consequences for other commodities. Other upside risks stem from lower-than-expected North American oil output, increased competition for liquefied natural gas cargoes, and sustained, higher-than-assumed coal and natural gas consumption in Asia.

PRECIOUS METALS AND AGRICULTURE

Gold prices, which are particularly sensitive to geopolitical tensions, marched higher all year, standing 27 percent above their December 2023 level in September. In agricultural commodity markets, prices for grains and edible oils have softened on improved harvest prospects, though elevated freight costs from Red Sea disruptions continue to affect food trade flows for countries dependent on Suez Canal shipping routes. A conflict escalation scenario assessed in the report assumes global oil supply declines by 2 mb/d due to a conflict-related shock in late 2024—a shortfall comparable to the Iraq War in 2003 and the Libyan civil war in 2011. In response, the price of Brent crude oil would rise close to $92/bbl at peak impact. For 2025 as a whole, Brent would average $84/bbl, 15 percent above the baseline forecast.
