Commodity Markets Outlook — Executive Summary
World Bank Group — October 2025

Commodity prices are expected to decline by about 7 percent overall this year, reflecting subdued global economic activity, elevated trade tensions and policy uncertainty, and ample global supply of oil. In 2026, commodity prices are forecast to fall by a further 7 percent, a fourth consecutive year of decline, as global growth remains sluggish and the oil market oversupplied. Energy price movements are expected to continue contributing to global disinflation in 2026. Metals and minerals prices are projected to remain stable in 2026, while agricultural prices are forecast to edge down, primarily due to strong supply conditions. Precious metals prices are projected to rise another 5 percent, after a historically large, investment-driven rally of about 40 percent in 2025. Risks to the commodity price projections are tilted to the downside. Key downside risks include weakerthan-expected global growth, a longer-than-assumed period of economic policy uncertainty, and additional oversupply of oil. Upside risks include intensifying geopolitical tensions, the market impact of additional oil sanctions, supply reductions stemming from additional trade restrictions, unfavorable weather conditions, and faster-than-expected rollout of new data centers. Commodity price volatility in recent years has revived interest in supply management via international commodity agreements. Historical experience, however, shows that the most effective policy is to promote diversification, innovation, transparency, and market-based pricing— measures that build lasting resilience to commodity price volatility. Recent developments Commodity markets have been impacted by a confluence of factors over the past six months, leaving prices below 2024 levels. Continued subdued economic activity, trade restrictions and associated high economic policy uncertainty, and weather-related supply shocks have all affected commodity markets. Energy prices, in particular, have pulled down the World Bank Group’s overall commodity price index (figure 1.A). The softening of commodity prices in nominal U.S. dollars would have been larger without the depreciation of the dollar since early 2025. In energy markets, the announcement of a new set of U.S. sanctions on Russian oil companies in late October was followed by spike in oil prices. Prior to recent events, Brent oil prices declined by 14 percent in the first nine months of the year (y/y), reflecting an oversupplied market and sluggish global growth. Over the past two years, oil demand growth in China, a key source of demand, has been sharply below its 2015-19 average, weighing on prices, while growth in the rest of the world has been broadly steady (figure 1.B). Increasing oil production by eight OPEC+ members since April, on top of continued strong gains in non-OPEC countries, has put additional downward pressure on prices. The U.S. benchmark for natural gas prices rose by 64 percent in the first nine months of the year (y/y) as European demand for U.S. liquified natural gas (LNG) surged due to reduced electricity output from renewable sources and efforts to build stocks. Recent developments in base metals markets have been shaped by evolving trade policy and economic conditions in China. Metal prices recovered in 2025Q3 after declining earlier in the year, reflecting resilient demand in major economies. In the lead-up to the U.S. tariffs, importers front-loaded purchases of aluminum and copper, contributing to short-term market tightening. For copper, accelerated shipments to the United States lifted onshore inventories ahead of the August tariffs and widened the price spread between the COMEX and LME exchanges (figure 1.C). In addition, an accident at one of the world’s largest mines in September caused a spike in copper prices. Iron ore prices rebounded in the third quarter, supported by expectations of record-high steel exports and a temporary pickup in Chinese steel production, despite a prolonged downturn in the property sector. Among precious metals, for which prices have risen for eight consecutive quarters, gold has surged to successive record highs in the second half of 2025 on strong investment demand due to its safe-haven status amid elevated geopolitical uncertainty, macroeconomic factors such as recent FIGURE 1 Recent developments in commodity markets Commodity prices have fallen since the beginning of 2025, largely driven by lower energy prices. A sharp decline in oil prices in 2025 reflects sluggish oil demand growth in China and excess global supply. Market anticipation of tariffs led to unusually wide price differentials across major copper exchanges for several months in 2025. Gold prices surged to successive record highs in the second half of the year, largely reflecting safe-haven demand. Food prices have continued to edge down, while beverage prices experienced a sharp, weather-related spike in the first half of the year. A. Commodity prices B. Average annual increase in oil
